---
title: "Creating Window"
excerpt_separator: "<!--more-->"
categories:
 - OpenGL 
tags:
 - opengl
---

The first thing we need to do before we start creating stunning graphics is to create an OpenGL context and an application window to draw in. 

<!--more-->

**Table of Contents**
* TOC
{:toc}

## Creating a window
However, setting up windows and contexts are specific per operating system and OpenGL purposefully tries to abstract itself from these operations. This means we have to create a window, define a context, and handle user input all by ourselves.

Luckily, there are quite a few libraries out there that provide the functionality we seek, some specifically aimed at OpenGL. Those libraries save us all the operation-system specific work and give us a window and an OpenGL context to render in. 

ome of the more popular libraries are GLUT, SDL, SFML and GLFW. On LearnOpenGL we will be using **GLFW**.

## GLFW
GLFW is a library, written in C, specifically targeted at OpenGL. GLFW gives us the bare necessities required for rendering goodies to the screen. It allows us to create an OpenGL context, define window parameters, and handle user input, which is plenty enough for our purposes.

### Example of using GLFW to create OpenGL context, define window parameters

```cpp
    // Initialize GLFW
    if (!glfwInit()) {
        std::cerr << "Failed to initialize GLFW" << std::endl;
        return -1;
    }

    // Set OpenGL version and profile
    glfwWindowHint(GLFW_CONTEXT_VERSION_MAJOR, 3);
    glfwWindowHint(GLFW_CONTEXT_VERSION_MINOR, 3);
    glfwWindowHint(GLFW_OPENGL_PROFILE, GLFW_OPENGL_CORE_PROFILE);

    // Create a windowed mode window and its OpenGL context
    GLFWwindow* window = glfwCreateWindow(800, 600, "LearnOpenGL", NULL, NULL);
    if (!window) {
        std::cerr << "Failed to create GLFW window" << std::endl;
        glfwTerminate();
        return -1;
    }

    glfwMakeContextCurrent(window);

```

## GLAD
OpenGL is only really a standard/specification it is up to the driver manufacturer to implement the specification to a driver that the specific graphics card supports. 

Since there are many different versions of OpenGL drivers, the location of most of its functions is not known at compile-time and needs to be queried at **run-time.**
{: .notice--warning}

It is then the task of the developer to retrieve the location of the functions he/she needs and store them in function pointers for later use.

```cpp
    // Initialize GLAD
    if (!gladLoadGLLoader((GLADloadproc)glfwGetProcAddress)) {
        std::cerr << "Failed to initialize GLAD" << std::endl;
        return -1;
    }
```

functions like `glGenBuffers`, `glBindBuffer`, `glBufferData`, and many others come from OpenGL, and **GLAD** is responsible for loading these function pointers at runtime. GLAD provides access to these functions by querying the graphics driver and making the function pointers available for your application.

## Hello Window
In the main function we first initialize GLFW with `glfwInit`, after which we can configure GLFW using `glfwWindowHint`.

Since we want to use OpenGL version 3.3 we'd like to tell GLFW that 3.3 is the OpenGL version we want to use.

We also tell GLFW we want to explicitly use the core-profile.
```cpp
int main()
{
    glfwInit();
    glfwWindowHint(GLFW_CONTEXT_VERSION_MAJOR, 3);
    glfwWindowHint(GLFW_CONTEXT_VERSION_MINOR, 3);
    glfwWindowHint(GLFW_OPENGL_PROFILE, GLFW_OPENGL_CORE_PROFILE);
    //glfwWindowHint(GLFW_OPENGL_FORWARD_COMPAT, GL_TRUE);
  
    return 0;
}
```

Next we're required to create a window object. This window object holds all the windowing data and is required by most of GLFW's other functions.

```cpp
GLFWwindow* window = glfwCreateWindow(800, 600, "LearnOpenGL", NULL, NULL);

if (window == NULL)
{
    std::cout << "Failed to create GLFW window" << std::endl;
    glfwTerminate();
    return -1;
}
glfwMakeContextCurrent(window);
```
**GLAD**

Next we initialize GLAD before we call any OpenGL function:

```cpp
if (!gladLoadGLLoader((GLADloadproc)glfwGetProcAddress))
{
    std::cout << "Failed to initialize GLAD" << std::endl;
    return -1;
} 
```

We pass GLAD the function to load the address of the OpenGL function pointers which is **OS-specific**. GLFW gives us `glfwGetProcAddress` that defines the correct function based on which OS we're compiling for.
{: .notice--primary}

**Viewport**

Before we can start rendering we have to do one last thing. We have to tell OpenGL the **size** of the rendering window so OpenGL knows how we want to display the data and coordinates with respect to the window.

```cpp
glViewport(0, 0, 800, 600);

// or you can use

int width = 0, height = 0;
glfwGetFramebufferSize(window, &width, &height); //retrieves the window size
glViewport(0, 0, width, height);

```
* The first two parameters of `glViewport` set the location of the *lower left corner* of the window. 
* The third and fourth parameter set the *width* and *height* of the rendering window in pixels

However, the moment a user **resizes** the window the viewport should be adjusted as well.
{: .notice--warning}

We can register a callback function on the window that gets called each time the window is resized.

This resize **callback function** has the following prototype:

```cpp
void framebuffer_size_callback(GLFWwindow* window, int width, int height);  
```
Whenever the window changes in size, GLFW calls this function and fills in the proper arguments for you to process.

```cpp
void framebuffer_size_callback(GLFWwindow* window, int width, int height)
{
    glViewport(0, 0, width, height);
}  
```

Now we do have to tell GLFW we want to call this function on every window resize by registering it:

```cpp
glfwSetFramebufferSizeCallback(window, framebuffer_size_callback);  
```

We don't want the application to draw a single image and then immediately quit and close the window. We want the application to keep drawing images and handling user input until the program has been explicitly told to stop.

For this reason we have to create a while loop, that we now call the **render loop**, that keeps on running until we tell GLFW to stop. The following code shows a very simple render loop:

```cpp
while(!glfwWindowShouldClose(window))
{
    glfwSwapBuffers(window);

    /**
    * glfwPollEvents();
    * checks if any events are triggered (like keyboard input or mouse movement events),
    * updates the window state, and calls the corresponding functions 
    * (which we can register via callback methods)
    */
    glfwPollEvents();
}
```

The `glfwSwapBuffers` will swap the color buffer (a large 2D buffer that contains *color values* for each *pixel* in GLFW's window) that is used to render to during this render iteration and show it as output to the screen.
{: .notice--success}

## Double buffer
When an application draws in a *single buffer* the resulting image may display flickering issues. This is because the resulting output image is not drawn in an instant, but drawn pixel by pixel and usually from left to right and top to bottom.

Because this image is not displayed at an instant to the user while still being rendered to, the result may contain artifacts.
{: .notice--warning}

To circumvent these issues, windowing applications apply a **double buffer** for rendering.

* Back Buffer: The buffer where the next frame is rendered.
* Front Buffer: The buffer currently being displayed on the scree

### How Double Buffering Works
1. **Render to Back Buffer:** The application renders the next frame to the back buffer.
2. **Swap Buffers:** Once rendering is complete, the back buffer is swapped with the front buffer.
3. **Display Front Buffer:** The front buffer is displayed on the screen while the back buffer is used for rendering the next frame.

As soon as all the rendering commands are finished we **swap** the back buffer to the front buffer so the image can be displayed without still being rendered to, removing all the aforementioned artifacts.
{: .notice--success}

**Termination**

As soon as we exit the render loop we would like to properly clean/delete all of GLFW's resources that were allocated. We can do this via the `glfwTerminate` function that we call at the end of the `main` function.

```cpp
glfwDestroyWindow(window);

glfwTerminate();

return 0;
```

**Input**

We also want to have some form of input control in GLFW and we can achieve this with several of GLFW's input functions. We'll be using GLFW's `glfwGetKey` function that takes the window as input together with a key. The function returns whether this key is currently being pressed.

We're creating a `processInput` function to keep all input code organized:

```cpp
void processInput(GLFWwindow *window)
{
    if(glfwGetKey(window, GLFW_KEY_ESCAPE) == GLFW_PRESS)
        glfwSetWindowShouldClose(window, true);
}
```

We then call `processInput` every iteration of the render loop:

```cpp
while (!glfwWindowShouldClose(window))
{
    processInput(window);

    glfwSwapBuffers(window);
    glfwPollEvents();
}
```

**Rendering**

We want to place all the **rendering commands** in the **render loop**, since we want to execute all the rendering commands each iteration or frame of the loop. This would look a bit like this:

```cpp
// render loop
while(!glfwWindowShouldClose(window))
{
    // input
    processInput(window);

    // rendering commands here example
    // glDrawArrays(GL_TRIANGLES, 0, 3);
    ...

    // check and call events and swap the buffers
    glfwPollEvents();
    glfwSwapBuffers(window);
}
```

An iteration of the render loop is more commonly called a frame.
{: .notice--success}

At the start of frame we want to clear the screen.Otherwise we would still see the results from the **previous frame.**

We can clear the screen's color buffer using `glClear` where we pass in *buffer bits* to specify which buffer we would like to clear.
The possible bits we can set are:

1. GL_COLOR_BUFFER_BIT
2. GL_DEPTH_BUFFER_BIT
3. GL_STENCIL_BUFFER_BIT

Right now we only care about the color values so we only clear the color buffer.

```cpp
glClearColor(0.2f, 0.3f, 0.3f, 1.0f);
glClear(GL_COLOR_BUFFER_BIT);
```

Note that we also specify the color to clear the screen with using `glClearColor`. Whenever we call `glClear` and clear the color buffer, the entire color buffer will be filled with the color as configured by `glClearColor`. This will result in a dark green-blueish color.

## Complete Source

[Download Source]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/opengl/main_create_window.cpp){:target="_blank"}